---
# vim:fo=tq:tw=144:syntax=off:sw=2:ts=2:
layout: music-post
title: New FAQ
tags: music 2012-sso-negotiations
---

{{ page.title }}
================

[Downloadable PDF is here.](/resources/faq-11-11-2012.pdf)

#Why are the Musicians on strike?#

Because we were given no other choice.

The Spokane Symphony Society presented the musicians with a “last, best, and final offer” which contained a 13.3% pay reduction, no compensation guarantees or minimums in the second year (of a two year contract), and the most restrictive leave policy of any orchestra in our class.  Simply put, it was a contract which would have been voted down by any self-respecting worker.  When the musicians voted to reject the contract offer, it was in the hope that the Society would return to the table to start again, think creatively with the musicians, and reach a  win-win solution.  Instead, they chose to unilaterally implement the contract, and only agreed to return to the bargaining table when threatened with an Unfair Labor Practice charge coupled with community pressure.  Sadly, these subsequent meetings were not aimed at finding a compromise and reaching an agreement, but at protecting the organization from the charge. As a last resort to break the potential impasse, the musicians informed the Society that the musicians had authorized a strike. Still in good faith that a solution could be found, we offered to take a 5% pay cut, and later nearly a 7% reduction. The difference in cost between our most recent proposal and the terms of the Society’s offer would be around $50,000. The Society rejected this last offer, and offered no counterproposal. They then informed the musicians that, unless we had any additional proposals, they would proceed with the understanding that we were on strike.  One thing should be clear:  the musicians are on record as having made the final offer; we cannot bargain against ourselves.  Told of the strike authorization, rather than continue to negotiate, the Society preferred to let the musicians strike.

A strike is never in anyone’s best interest. It damages the reputation of the Spokane Symphony, it hurts the musicians who are without income, and it disappoints our audience. We eagerly want to arrive at a fair, just, and equitable agreement and return to the stage.

#What are the main issues?#

We really have only one issue: the ability to make a living as musicians serving our community on and off the stage. There are largely two factors involved in this.

1. Compensation:

    By 2006, it became clear that Core musicians were performing too often to reasonably balance other significant employment, yet weren't earning enough from the Symphony to cobble together a living. The decision was made to gradually move the salaries of the Core musicians to a level that could truly serve as the foundation for a livelihood. This was achieved in exchange for an increased maximum availability, so that the Symphony could utilize our ‘services’ more often and more easily in support of its mission - through fundraising or marketing events, to education and outreach activities - in addition to an expanded schedule which now includes a summer season. The effect of all this has been twofold: these higher salaries have attracted a new group of talented, highly trained musicians to join our orchestra and community; and the increased income has enabled a level of professional dedication which has brought the artistry of our performances to an entirely new level.  Following the economic downturn, the musicians voluntarily gave back the final year of the previous contract, resulting in 10% less income, and our salaries have been frozen since then, at $17,460. The Society now seeks to dramatically reduce our salaries and the performance capacity they enable, due to 'unused services'. Well, unfortunately, this would be penny-wise and pound-foolish.  These reductions would have both a devastating impact on the artistic quality of our performances, and they would also squander opportunities to serve our community in a variety of low-cost capacities. 

2. Attendance and Leave:

    Because this salary is not enough to pay all of our bills, it's necessary for us to have some freedom to pursue other opportunities. We can't afford not to. Any such leave we take from the symphony is UNPAID - compensation associated with missed services is withheld so that the organization can hire a replacement. While the symphony states that bringing a replacement musician to Spokane for rehearsals and performances can cost up to $500 an occurrence, the majority of our substitute musicians are local, and cost the symphony nothing extra to hire; moreover, this leave actually saves the Symphony money when a different contracted musician can be hired.

    Allowing us the flexibility to earn a living as musicians is not only necessary for our survival, it's in the organization's best interest as well. The Spokane Symphony is a better orchestra when its musicians are able to get new ideas and stay freshly inspired; this is also true for our Music Director, whose schedule allows him to perform elsewhere, including with his other orchestra in Stamford, CT.

    Other orchestras which don’t have the resources to pay musicians a livable salary offer this flexibility. For instance, in Austin, contracted musicians need only be present for 25% of scheduled events; the Pacific Northwest Ballet allows it’s players to miss nearly half of its performances. 

#Are the musicians withholding their performance from the audience?#

The Society’s decision to cancel the Splash, Video Games, and Classics 4 concerts was unilateral – it came as a surprise to the musicians, who continue to hope for resumption of negotiations and a speedy settlement.  As musicians, we live to play music and to perform.  We love our audience!  There is nothing more gratifying to us than to hear your appreciation for the work that we do.  If you wonder why on earth we work as hard as we do for such low wages, well, that’s why.  And by the way, you can still hear us play!  Please consider coming to our next benefit concert...  Stay tuned for details!

#Should musician compensation be cut following a balanced budget?#

Since we've recently proposed salary cuts ourselves, we're clearly cognizant of the challenges facing the Spokane Symphony. However, it is our view that a balanced budget demonstrates that the money is out there, and any pay-cuts which might be justified based on uncertainty going forward should be reasonable.  Severe, devastating reductions to our salaries aren't necessary when the economy seems to be improving. There simply needs to be a compromise which balances the orchestra’s fiscal health with its ability to maintain musical excellence. Spokane deserves both an enduring institution AND a terrific orchestra.

#Will administration and management also reduce their compensation?#

The musicians are aware and appreciative of the difficult sacrifices made by the staff over the last several years. We hope it is also understood that cobbling together a living based on annual salaries of less than $20K is also a formidable challenge, and involves constantly making painful choices. In spite of it all, we've been doing our best to maintain the high artistic standard our audience has come to expect.  The dispute here is centered around what we need in order to survive in Spokane, and the level of concessions which are appropriate.

#Are other orchestras facing a similar situation?#

Yes! In spite of the difficult economy, the Spokane Symphony is not the only orchestra to have emerged in relatively strong financial shape - orchestras in Portland, Los Angeles, and Buffalo among others, are also doing quite well and have recently reached progressive contracts with their musicians! On the other hand, several orchestras have indeed found themselves in serious trouble over the past several years; but, unlike them, the Spokane Symphony has no accumulated debt related to operating expenses, a healthy endowment, and an enviable ratio of earned to contributed income. This promising outlook is a result both of the sacrifices made by all of the SSO's employees, as well as some extraordinary efforts undertaken by our volunteer board, not to mention the heroic achievements of the amazing Spokane Symphony Associates. There are certainly challenges moving forward, and the musicians are willing to do our part, but we face serious difficulties ourselves, and any fair agreement must recognize both of these realities
