---
# vim:fo=tq:tw=144:syntax=off:
layout: music-post
title: Day Jobs
tags: music 2012-sso-negotiations
---

{{ page.title }}
================

*"Why doesn't everyone just get a day job?"*

I hear that phrase all the time when I try to explain what it means to be a professional musician in the Spokane Symphony. People know that I
have a day job, and assume that everything would be fixed if musicians would just realize that what they do is just a fun hobby and get a "real"
job. The above statement is usually followed up with a variation of...

*But you're so lucky that you get paid to do what you love!*

Before I explain why an orchestra of "day jobbers" is neither desirable nor particularly special, I'll tackle the second statement.

Think about what that statement implies - that the only "real work" people do is work they don't like. That sentiment seems pathologically sick
and twisted to me - why spend the only life you have doing something you don't even like? If you needed triple bypass surgery and your doctor
said "Yeah, I'll do a great job, but man I hate being a surgeon" would you then want your surgery? How about getting your bathroom remodeled by
an especially disgruntled contractor?

Music and the arts in general fall into this twilight zone category where the most accomplished practicioners are expected to do their work for
next to free simply because they "love it". I love writing software, I earn and expect a decent salary and not a single person thinks that's out
of the ordinary. Let me tell you - I worked harder to become an accomplished bassoonist than I ever did to become an accomplished programmer
(luck only played a small part!), yet people expect me to play music for free or next to it.

There are two main reasons why an orchestra of hobbyists represents cultural fail - one is practical, and the other philosophical.

First, the practical reason: when you work a full-time day job, you physically *can not* devote the time necessary to play your absolute best.
"But", you may think, "how do you do it Luke?!?!" Well, here's one reason - 2nd bassoon parts usually do not require a lot of advance
preparation. This is unique within the orchestra. Sure, I spend time making reeds to ensure I have a decent supply but I don't do that as much
as dedicated professionals. Another reason is that I have accepted a compromise between making money via a day job and not playing my absolute
best all the time. I play *well enough* for the expectations of the Spokane Symphony but I know that I can and have played at a much higher
level. When duty calls - as when I performed as a contrabassoon soloist in Cologne, Germany a few years back or when I have an especially
difficult part for a concert - I don't do anything else but practice, eat, sleep and go to my day job. But that is *absolutely unsustainable* in
the long run for me and for any other musician in the symphony.

I played principal bassoon on a recent New Years Beethoven Ninth concert and the amount of preparation necessary to play the part at the level I
expected took almost all my free time for the three weeks leading up to the concert. There is *no way* a principal player in the symphony can
work a full-time day job and play their best for concerts - the two are mutually exclusive.

My wife Margaret plays in the first violin section and consistently gets some of the most *difficult* music concert after concert. She always
wants to play her best and practices three, four or more hours daily to keep herself at the performance level she expects. There is no way
she could work a day job and play her best. It's fortunate that my day job allows her to be able to perform with the Spokane Symphony - if the
situation were different, she would not be in Spokane, period.

An orchestra comprised mostly of people with day jobs can not perform as well as the Spokane Symphony does now and the audience would hear the
difference. I would go so far to say that the performances may not even justify the current ticket price levels - I know that I would not pay
$30 or more to hear an orchestra of hobbyists.

OK, so it's practically impossible to have a professional orchestra of day jobbers, what about the philosophical reason?

When someone donates money to the Spokane Symphony, they are consciously choosing to support live, professional music in Spokane WA and the
people creating that music.  They recognize the dedication that it takes to becoming an accomplished musician and they recognize the beauty that
those musicians bring into their lives and to the city in general. They realize that Spokane does not need an orchestra in the strictest
utilitarian sense, but that Spokane does need an orchestra of professional musicians to differentiate itself from other small cities that can't
or won't make the same cultural investment.

If the Spokane Symphony becomes an orchestra of day jobbers, why would anyone donate to it? There is *nothing special* about that situation -
you're only paying people to do their hobby in their spare time. Big flippin' deal. You are not enabling them to dedicate themselves to their
art. The ability to have artists such as professional musicians is what differentiates an enlightened city from an ordinary one. It recognizes
that people need more than bricks-and-mortar and basic human needs.
